I recently became curious about the connections between the complex mechanisms of the digital world and that of biological systems. I came into college thinking that I would devote myself to research in genetics, but I did not want to leave my strengths in math behind. I started exploring ways to converge my interest in genetics and my love of math, and I attended biology research seminars where speakers talked about how crucial data skills were to their analyses. Hearing about research where computer programs and pipelines were written to organize crucial data about different gene families, phage satellites, and more inspired me to explore this realm of research and development.

Currently, I am about to start work in a bioinformatics lab regarding genome architecture in ciliates, and I lack experience in command-terminal manipulation and coding in general. I have only ever taken  an AP computer science class in high school and an introductory programming course last year, so I am not well-versed in digital data organization. However, I hope that APSC 460 will teach me the fundamental skills that I need to know, in order to be successful with bioinformatics research and careers. I am most excited to learn about how to read genetic sequences and log related data.

I hope that repeated practice and assignment completion, along with my own set of guided notes, will help me gain the muscle memory required to apply bioinformatic skills. Moreover, I plan to regularly seek extra help to help guide me through the conceptual and technical aspects of every manipulation we do to the repository. 

In regards to this assignment, this folder structure is beneficial for research because it contributes to sane data organization. This particular “tree-like” structure as an output of the code allows potential collaborators to know the location of particular information. The organization of subdirectories and placeholder files within other directories allow for a cleaner arrangement of niche information that may need its own container away from general information that would otherwise be cluttered. The bottom line is that reproducible research is more possible when other individuals can pull the code and recreate the results. This information can be attained when the when/what/how/where of the data can be revisited.

In fact, documented code is part of what makes reproducible research possible. In order for someone to recreate the results, they should not only know what code was exactly used to generate the data. The significance of this code is just as important. The two pillars of bioinformatics research is reproducibility and robust work, and with large datasets often entering the system, it is unlikely that the scientist remembers why they handled the data a certain way. Moreover, instead of relying on the original individual who wrote the code, anyone with permission can access this information to add their own updated data or access a stage in the research pipeline upstream that may have caused problems downstream. Understandable instructions for replication and analyses are facilitated by documented code. 

In relation to bioinformatics, I hope to work somewhere on the research and development pipeline. However, with no prior experience or knowledge on the computational concepts that fuel the manipulation and understanding of genomic data in a modern digital environment, I cannot talk about data in a professional setting. I hope this course teaches me important data analytics skills and encourages me to participate in a wide range of opportunities related to bioinformatics.
